Trustees of Dartmouth College – OPE ID: 00257300
Trustees of Dartmouth College – OPE ID: 00257300
CARES Act – Higher Education Emergency Relief Fund
30-Day Fund Report – July 10, 2020
Section 18004(e) of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act ("CARES Act" or the "Act")), Pub. L. No. 116-136, 134 Stat. 281 (March 27, 2020), directs institutions receiving funds under Section 18004 of the Act to submit a report to the U.S. Secretary Education describing the use of funds distributed from the Higher Education Emergency Relief Fund.
As required by the CARES Act and in compliance with guidance from the U.S. Department of Education (the "Department"), Dartmouth College reports here its use of the Emergency Financial Aid Grants to students. The Department's May 6, 2020 guidance identified seven topics on which each institution receiving funding must report. The Department's requirements appear enumerated in bold/italics below and Dartmouth's response appears immediately afterwards.
An acknowledgement that the institution signed and returned to the Department the Certification and Agreement and the assurance that the institution has used, or intends to use, no less than 50 percent of the funds received under Section 18004(a)(1) of the CARES Act to provide Emergency Financial Aid Grants to students.
Dartmouth College acknowledges that it signed and returned to the Department the Certification and Agreement and the assurance that the institution has used, or intends to use, no less than 50 percent of the funds received under Section 18004(a)(1) of the CARES Act to provide Emergency Financial Aid Grants to students.
The total amount of funds that the institution will receive or has received from the Department pursuant to the institution's Certification and Agreement [for] Emergency Financial Aid Grants to Students.
Dartmouth College will receive or has received $1,714,675 from the Department pursuant to the institution's Certification and Agreement for Emergency Financial Aid Grants to Students.
The total amount of Emergency Financial Aid Grants distributed to students under Section 18004(a)(1) of the CARES Act as of the date of submission (i.e., as of the 30-day Report and every 45 days thereafter).
Dartmouth College has distributed $1,494,250 of Emergency Financial Aid Grants to students under Section 18004(a)(1) of the CARES Act as of the date of this report. Dartmouth has communicated with eligible students multiple times to ensure that they are aware of the availability of the funds and to answer questions about the distribution of the funds. Dartmouth will continue to communicate with eligible students, as appropriate.
The estimated total number of students at the institution eligible to participate in programs under Section 484 in Title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965 and thus eligible to receive Emergency Financial Aid Grants to students under Section 18004(a)(1) of the CARES Act.
Dartmouth College has an estimated 2,050 students who are eligible to participate in programs under Section 484 in Title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965 in the spring 2020 term and thus eligible to receive Emergency Financial Aid Grants under Section 18004(a)(1) of the CARES Act.
The total number of students who have received an Emergency Financial Aid Grant to students under Section 18004(a)(1) of the CARES Act.
877 students have received an Emergency Financial Aid Grant to students under Section 18004(a)(1) of the CARES Act.
The method(s) used by the institution to determine which students receive Emergency Financial Aid Grants and how much they would receive under Section 18004(a)(1) of the CARES Act.
Students who are eligible to complete a FAFSA, enrolled in the spring term, and had an estimated parent contribution of $20,000 or less received amounts on a sliding scale ranging from $2,500 for each student with no parent contribution to $1,000 for students with a parent contribution of $15,000 to $20,000.
Any instructions, directions, or guidance provided by the institution to students concerning the Emergency Financial Aid Grants.
a. Students eligible to receive the funds received communications from Dartmouth's Financial Aid Office that included the following information about the funds and how to access the funds:
You have qualified for Coronavirus Assistance, Relief and Economic Security (CARES) Act funding. The proposed award is $[x]. Information about the funding is below. In order to receive the award amount, you must affirmatively accept this funding by logging into DartHub. After logging into DartHub, search for "Covid Funds" or go to the Finance and Accounts tile and click on the Covid Funds tile.
What is the CARES Act? The CARES Act, which appropriated the Higher Education Emergency Relief Funds (HEERF), provides students who are or could be eligible to participate in programs under Title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (i.e., eligible for federal student financial aid), with emergency financial aid grants to help cover expenses related to the disruption of campus operations due to coronavirus. Grants will be distributed to College students with the greatest demonstrated financial need as determined through the 2019-2020 application for financial assistance.
What is the source of funding for these emergency grants? HEERF will be the funding source for students eligible for Title IV funds.
Who is eligible to receive emergency assistance funds? Eligibility will include students who were enrolled in the spring 2020 term. Grants will be based on a parent contribution as determined by the Financial Aid Office for the 2019-2020 academic year. Students with a parent contribution of less than, or equal to, $20,000 will be offered a cash grant.
How do students claim these funds? To claim these funds, certify on DartHub you are incurring expenses that meet the criteria for receipt of a cash grant and provide a current mailing address for funds to be sent if direct deposit is not an option.
After logging into DartHub, search for 'COVID Funds' or go to the Finances and Accounts category and click on the COVID Funds tile.
If you are unable to find the COVID Funds tile, please follow these troubleshooting steps:
Open DartHub in an "incognito" or "private browsing" session.
Open DartHub with a different browser.
Clear your cookies and browser cache, close your browser, and try again.
How will the funds be processed? After you have certified through DartHub, the cash grant will be disbursed to your student account for the purpose of directly issuing the funds to you. Cash grants will not be applied against any existing balance due to the College. Students should make separate arrangements to resolve any outstanding balances on their Dartmouth student account. The cash grant will be identified on the student account as "CARES Act Funds." Campus Billing will be processing payments the second and third weeks of July 2020.
How do I set up direct deposit? Please read the eRefund Setup for Students (PDF) instructions.
What are the tax implications of accepting these funds? Students may wish to review the Internal Revenue Service guidance available. Dartmouth cannot provide tax advice to students. Students should seek advice from a tax professional if they have questions.
b. After logging into DartHub, eligible students can view the following certification statement and instructions:
Certification Statement
By claiming this emergency grant through the CARES Act Higher Education Emergency Relief Funds (HEERF), I acknowledge that I am incurring allowable expenses related to the disruption of campus operations due to coronavirus during my enrollment in the Spring 2020 Term of at least, or in excess of, the amount received. Examples of allowable expenses include eligible expenses under my "cost of attendance," which is defined by the U.S. Department of Education to cover expenses such as food, housing, course materials, technology, and health care. I further acknowledge that these funds are not part of any federal student financial aid award I received for the 2019-2020 Academic Year.
Instructions to Students
What is the CARES Act? The CARES Act, which appropriated the funds for the Higher Education Emergency Relief Funds (HEERF), provides students who are or could be eligible to participate in programs under Title IV of the Higher Education act of 1965 (i.e., eligible for federal student financial aid), with emergency financial aid grants to help cover expenses related to the disruption of campus operations due to coronavirus. Grants will be distributed to College students with the greatest demonstrated financial need as determined through the 2019-2020 application for financial assistance.
What is the source of funding for these emergency grants? HEERF will be the funding source for students eligible for Title IV funds.
Who is eligible to receive emergency assistance funds? Eligibility will include students who are enrolled in the Spring 2020 Term. Grants will be based on a Parent Contribution as determined by the Financial Aid Office for the 2019-2020 Academic Year. Students with a Parent Contribution of less than, or equal to, $20,000 will be offered a cash grant.
How do students claim these funds? To claim these funds, certify below you are incurring expenses that meet the criteria for receipt of a cash grant and provide a current mailing address for funds to be sent if direct deposit is not an option.
How will the funds be processed? These cash grants will be posted to the student account for the purpose of directly issuing the funds. Cash grants will not be applied against any existing balance due to the College. Students should make separate arrangements to resolve any outstanding balances on their Dartmouth student account to avoid future consequences. The cash grant will display on the student account as "Cares Act Funds".
How do I set up Direct Deposit? Follow this link for E-Refund set up instructions: https://www.dartmouth.edu/finance/documents/tuition_payments_tab_documents/e-refund_setup.pdf
What are the tax implications of accepting these funds? Students may wish to review the Internal Revenue Service guidance available at https://www.irs.gov/newsroom/faqs-higher-education-emergency-relief-fund-and-emergency-financial-aid-grants-under-the-cares-act. Dartmouth cannot provide tax advice to students. Students should seek advice from a tax professional if they have questions.
I agree that by clicking the "Accept" button I have provided an electronic signature that signifies my intent to agree to the Certification above. Dartmouth may consider my electronic execution and delivery of this document to be valid, binding and effective for all purposes.
