Dartmouth community members will be able to ask questions and get updates about the institution's priorities, decisions, and operation during the COVID-19 pandemic from Provost Joseph Helble in a live weekly broadcast, set to begin Wednesday, April 29, called Community Conversations.
"Over the past two months, so much of our communication around COVID-19 and just about everything happening at Dartmouth has been via email, and I, like so many of us, greatly miss being on campus and having the chance to discuss this in person. I'm glad to have this opportunity to connect with members of our community in a different way, and hopefully keep us all a little more connected as we look forward to a return to in-person meetings," says Helble.
The conversations, scheduled to run through the remainder of spring term, will begin every Wednesday at 3:30 p.m. Helble will take audience members' questions live and the program will include invited guests. First up are Lisa Adams and Josh Keniston, co-chairs of the COVID-19 task force. Adams is a physician and an associate professor of medicine at the Geisel School of Medicine. Keniston is vice president for institutional projects.
A call-in number will be available for community members with limited internet access who want to listen to the show without video. Find out how to watch or listen to the broadcast and send in questions during the show.
Community Conversations is being produced by Dartmouth's Media Production Group and the Office of Communications. The show will be broadcast from MPG's Starr Studio in the Dartmouth Library's Baker-Berry Library.
"While there is no substitute for gathering in person in a planned or spontaneous way, Community Conversations is an effort to bring the community together, see some familiar faces, and over time, hear directly from students, faculty, and staff about their experiences during the pandemic," says Justin Anderson, vice president for communications.
For the latest information on Dartmouth's response to the pandemic visit the COVID-19 website.
Susan J. Boutwell can be reached susan.j.boutwell@dartmouth.edu.
