Faculty Frequently Asked Questions
How do stay-at-home orders from the governors of Vermont and New Hampshire affect Dartmouth?
Recent emergency orders from N.H. Gov. Chris Sununu and Vermont Gov. Phil Scott restricting and minimizing activities outside of the home permit Dartmouth to continue its existing arrangements for core campus operations and remote teaching and working. The safety and wellbeing of our employees is our highest concern during this difficult time. Employees who have questions about their ability to work on campus should speak with their supervisor/manager about their concerns.
How can I get technology and teaching help?
We have redeployed our IT resources to triple the size of the team dedicated to fielding support request for remote learning platforms and we will be offering extended support hours starting during the week of March 23. The DCAL and LDT teams created an online toolkit to help instructors get started teaching remotely, learn best practices, and find guides and trainings.
How can I get support during this difficult time?
Speak with a professional counselor at GuidanceResources, Dartmouth's online Employee Assistance Program (EAP) partner offering confidential telephone counseling 24 hours a day, every day. Faculty and staff can also contact EAP counselor Sharon Morisi. She is available via Zoom and telephone during normal business hours and offers support to supervisors who are assisting staff. Confidential virtual counseling is also available to students, faculty, and staff with Daveen Litwin, the Tucker Center chaplain, and with the United Campus Ministry advisers of multiple faith traditions. Email Litwin for an appointment. Resources are also available at Wellness at Dartmouth.
Will faculty tenure and promotion considerations continue?
Dartmouth has enacted an institution-wide one-year extension to the tenure clock for all current tenure-track faculty members, except for those whose portfolios are complete and whose reviews are anticipated to be completed during the remainder of the 2019-2020 academic year. The extension, which applies to faculty at any stage of the tenure-track process with the exception noted above, is supported by the deans of all our schools, and applies to all tenure-track faculty in Arts and Sciences, Geisel, Thayer, and Tuck. The extension allows for flexibility for all faculty whose work will be adversely affected by the COVID-19 pandemic and its restrictions on travel and operations. However, no faculty member is required to utilize the extension. Those who wish to remain on their current timeline may choose to do so and should consult their chair, associate dean, or dean at the appropriate time.
What precautions are in place for employees who continue to work on campus?
Our environmental health and safety team is providing guidance for those who do need to be on-campus about best practices to protect themselves and recommending appropriate protective equipment. Faculty who are returning to campus to work are required to complete the Temperature Screening Assessment prior to coming on-site.
