FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS ON COVID-19
We will continue to update this FAQ to address inquiries from the Dartmouth community and from the general public. As the COVID-19 pandemic continues to evolve in our area and throughout the world, questions will be added and answers updated as new information becomes available.
Please see these special sections for more in-depth information:
FOR THE DARTMOUTH COMMUNITY AND THE PUBLIC
How will I know when new information is available?
Important community messages are sent by email to all students, faculty, and staff and posted on this website in the Community Messages section. Additionally, they are featured on Dartmouth News, in the news section of Vox Daily, and on our social media channels—Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram.
Is Dartmouth open?
Dartmouth is open. However most students have gone home, and many faculty and staff are working from home. Those employees still working on campus are following social-distancing guidelines and hygiene recommendations from the CDC.
In accordance with recommendations from the federal government, Dartmouth is limiting gatherings on campus. All in-person, on-campus events and activities have been suspended indefinitely. Events may be streamed/held virtually.
Athletic facilities, the Dartmouth Library system, and the Hood Museum of Art are closed. All events at the Hopkins Center for the Arts have been postponed or canceled. Access to buildings is limited to only those employees who are performing necessary duties.
How many people at Dartmouth have tested positive for COVID-19?
To date, eight individuals on our campus have tested positive for COVID-19.
Are admissions tours and interviews being offered?
Admissions tours are suspended. Virtual tours are available on the undergraduate admissions website.
Will commencement and reunions take place this year?
Commencement ceremonies have been postponed. We are working with student representatives and others across campus to review alternative dates and will be consulting with members of the senior class to determine the ideal time and program. We expect to lock in a specific date by the end of June.
The Alumni Relations team has developed virtual reunion programming for classes to enjoy in lieu of the traditional on-campus events. Visit https://preunions.dartmouth.edu/schedule for a program listing.
Will summer athletics camps take place? Will other outside groups be able to use Dartmouth facilities for their summer programs?
All athletic camps and on-campus residential summer programs have also been canceled. At present, all events, performances, and activities on campus have been suspended indefinitely.
