Sen. Kirsten Gillibrand ’88 (D-NY) is one of five champions of social justice to be honored during Dartmouth’s annual celebration of the life and work of Martin Luther King Jr.
kirstengill-250.jpg Sen. Kirsten Gillibrand '88 (D-NY) is the winner of the 2014 Ongoing Commitment Award. (Photo courtesy of the Office of Institutional Diversity and Equity)
Dartmouth’s Social Justice Awards honor members of the Dartmouth community who have contributed significantly to social justice, peace, civil rights, education, public health, or environmental justice. Gillibrand is the 2014 Ongoing Commitment Award honoree. The junior senator from New York took office in 2009 and has gained prominence for her engagement on issues including sexual assault in the U.S. military. Gillibrand will be honored in absentia.
Gillibrand’s fellow honorees are Emerging Leadership awardee Lia Carnie Monahon ’98, trial attorney, the Committee for Public Counsel Services for the Commonwealth of Massachusetts; Lifetime Achievement Award winner Andrew Wells III, president, Wells Technology, Inc.; Lester B. Granger ’18 Award for Lifetime Achievement honoree Martin Cetron ’81, director, Global Migration and Quarantine, Centers for Disease Control; and Holly Fell Sateia Award honoree Christine Crabb ’90, formerly the assistant director of Dartmouth conferences and events.
social-justice-awards-590.jpg In addition to Kirsten Gillibrand ’88, the Social Justice Award recipients include, from left, Martin Cetron ’81 (Lester B. Granger ’18 Award for Lifetime Achievement), Christine Crabb ’90 (Holly Fell Sateia Award), Lia Carnie Monahon ’98 (Emerging Leadership Award), and Andrew Wells III (Lifetime Achievement Award).
Monahon, Wells, Cetron, and Crabb will participate in a panel discussion at 4:30 p.m. on Friday, January 31, in Collis Common Ground. The event is free and open to the public, and will be followed by a reception.
Dartmouth’s Social Justice Awards are sponsored by the Martin Luther King Jr. Celebration, the Office of Institutional Diversity & Equity, the Tucker Foundation, and the Geisel School of Medicine.
