Frequently Asked Questions About COVID-19 Health Screening
What is the new health screening requirement, and when does it go into effect?
The New Hampshire Governor's Economic Reopening Taskforce has distributed universal guidelines for New Hampshire employers to put in place to provide a healthy work environment. Effective May 11, the guidelines state, "Employers must develop a process for screening all employees reporting for work for COVID-19 related symptoms." Employers must also require all employees who are sick or not feeling well to stay home.
Who must follow the screening requirement guidelines?
All Dartmouth paid employees are required to follow the guidelines every day that they come to campus, beginning May 11, 2020.
Dartmouth is also requiring that any student (undergraduate, graduate, or professional student) or postdoc who enters academic or administrative campus buildings for authorized activities must comply with the requirements of this process.
What do the health screening requirements require employees, students, and postdocs to do?
On each day they come to campus, Dartmouth employees, students, and postdocs subject to this process are required to take their temperature and record it on a website called the Temperature Self-Assessment, or TSA, and answer five questions related to COVID-19 exposure and symptoms. They must also follow the guidelines at the end of the survey regarding whether they should report to work or for authorized activities.
What are the questions that must be answered each day as part of the Temperature Self-Assessment (TSA) screening?
The questions, as set out in the state guidelines, are:
Have you been in close contact with a confirmed case of COVID-19 within the past 14 days? Have you had a fever or felt feverish in the last 72 hours? Are you experiencing any new respiratory symptoms including a runny nose, sore throat, cough, or shortness of breath? Are you experiencing any new muscle aches or chills? Have you experienced any new change in your sense of taste or smell?
If an employee responds "yes" to any of the questions, they must refrain from going to campus or, if they are on campus already, they must leave campus immediately and contact their physician. They must also notify their supervisor that they will not be at work.
If a student or postdoc subject to this process responds "yes" to any of the questions, they must refrain from going to campus or, if they have already traveled to campus, they must leave campus immediately. Students should contact Dick's House and postdocs should contact their primary care provider for further assessment and guidance. They must also notify their advisor or dean that they will not be at their research or activity location that day.
How can I obtain medical clearance that allows me to work on site?
If the health screening tool indicated that you should not report to work, but you do not believe your symptoms are due to COVID-19, contact your health care provider or Dick's House to discuss. Until and unless your medical provider confirms that it is unlikely that you have COVID-19 and that your symptoms have another more likely explanation (i.e. allergies, muscle strain, etc.), you should not report to work and should follow the guidelines regarding sick employees. After consulting with your medical provider, documentation should be provided to Dick's House. The clinical staff there will assess the situation and provide you with the medical clearance to be given to your supervisor or principal investigator.
Who can see the information that people are submitting through the five-question screening? With whom will it be shared?
Information submitted through the screening questions will be treated as confidential information accessible only by individuals in Human Resources. Supervisors and deans/advisors will be given information only on whether the screening was completed and whether the results determined that the employee, student, or postdoc subject to this process should or should not be at work or at their research (or other approved) location on campus. Supervisors and deans/advisors will not see the answers to the individual questions, or the temperature reported.
What's the best process for employees, students, and postdocs subject to this process to conduct their health screening?
Before coming to work each day, or reporting for approved academic activities, employees, students, and postdocs subject to this process with internet access or a smartphone should log onto the Dartmouth health screening website and respond to the questions asked. The website is: dartgo.org/tsa. Based on the responses, the website will indicate whether it is fine to report to work or a research (or other educational) location.
If I'm only going to my office to pick up mail or get supplies and will only be there for a short time, do I have to comply with this requirement?
Yes. Anyone accessing a Dartmouth building is expected to comply.
What about employees, students, or postdocs subject to this process who don't have internet access or a smartphone to conduct their health screening prior to coming to work?
Employees, students, and postdocs subject to this process who are unable or forget to conduct their health screening at home, should have their health screening conducted on campus as soon as they arrive. Several locations have been established to conduct the screenings. At each location, someone will be available to take your temperature using a non-contact thermometer. They will also record your responses to the series of health-related questions on the Dartmouth TSA website using a tablet computer. Only the individual who is conducting the health screening will touch the computer.
What are the locations and hours for the on-campus health screenings? UPDATED July 8, 2020
Screenings are available at the following locations:
Class of 1953 Commons, north dining room; 7 a.m. to 5 p.m., daily
Hopkins Center, 5:30 a.m. to 5 p.m., weekdays; enter through Hinman Mail Services
Dick's House, foyer; 8 a.m. to 4 p.m., weekdays; enter through Rope Ferry/Dewey Field parking lot
New location available beginning July 13: Vail building, foyer by the loading dock; 5:30 a.m. to 5 p.m., weekdays; (Life Sciences Center location will no longer be available)
Dick's House is available for assistance checking temperatures but cannot assist in answering the online questionnaire. Students and postdocs subject to this process and employees who have access to the internet or a smartphone can use the Dick's House location. Locations will be set up to keep those waiting in line 6-feet apart.
Are the students living on campus required to be screened?
No. Students living on campus who are not engaged in approved activities requiring that they be present in academic or administrative campus buildings are not required to be screened. However, any student employee who is actively working on campus must participate in a daily health screening just as all other Dartmouth employees.
Do I need to wear a mask to the screening or when I'm on campus?
These measures include wearing a face mask or covering in locations where you are not able to maintain a distance of at least 6 feet from others. Face masks can slow the spread of the virus and help people who may have the virus and do not know it from transmitting it to others.
Are these processes final?
The processes described above are part of a pilot program that was developed to comply immediately with the state's new requirements. Based on the results of this pilot, the processes will be reviewed and may be revised to improve the experience for users and to meet evolving federal and state guidance.
Whom do I contact if I have questions about this health screening process?
Questions may be directed to the Human Resources Office at human.resources@dartmouth.edu or (603) 646-3411.
Students can contact Dick's House at dicks.house.health.service@dartmouth.edu or (603) 646-9400.
Where can I find out more information about Dartmouth's response to COVID-19?
Information is available on the COVID-19 website.
I'm a supervisor and I've been informed that my employee should not be on campus based on the self-assessment. What should I do?
Instruct the employee to stay at home and follow guidance on the COVID-19 website about staying away from campus. Also, advise the employee to consult their primary care provider.
I'm a student's advisor/dean and I've been informed that my student or postdoc should not be on campus based on the self-assessment. What should I do?
Instruct the student to stay at home and follow guidance on the COVID-19 website about staying away from campus. Also, advise the affected student to consult Dick's House or their medical provider.
I'm a Dartmouth employee who does not work on campus, but in a different location in New Hampshire. Does this apply to me?
Yes. The screenings are required for all Dartmouth employees reporting to work for Dartmouth outside of their home. This requirement includes any location where you may perform your work, including Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center.
How long will the daily screenings be in effect?
The daily screening requirement will be in effect until further notice.
Are contractors and vendors obligated to participate in Dartmouth's health screening?
They are required to comply with the screening laws of New Hampshire through their employer.
