Staff Frequently Asked Questions
The Office of Human Resources is committed to providing updates on the latest developments and how they affect our people and our workplace. Below you'll find answers to some commonly asked questions. We will share answers to more of your questions as the COVID-19 situation evolves. We will host a virtual supervisor roundtable each Wednesday at noon to answer additional questions that arise. To join the Zoom meeting, use this link or call in using 646-558-8656 with meeting ID 680 162 496.
Where can I find information on the hiring freeze announced on April 3?
The Office of Human Resources has information on the COVID-19 hiring freeze. The HR site includes the process for requesting recruitment and review of a position thought to be of critical need. It also has an FAQ on the hiring freeze.
How can I get technology help?
We have redeployed our IT resources to triple the size of the team dedicated to fielding support request for remote learning platforms and we will be offering extended support hours. ITC has compiled a variety of resources to help employees with the change to remote teaching, learning, and working. You can find a variety of information to help with your technical needs.
What precautions are in place for employees who continue to work on campus?
We are modifying work schedules to require fewer individuals performing essential services to be on campus at any one time. Our environmental health and safety team provides guidance for those who do need to be on campus about best practices to protect themselves and recommending appropriate protective equipment. The CDC also provides guidance on this topic.
What should I do if I'm concerned about COVID-19 exposure?
The CDC website has excellent resources for understanding community-related exposure. The information is available on the CDC site. If you have concerns about your own health or whether you should self-quarantine or isolate, please call your primary care provider.
How can I disinfect my facility?
If you are concerned about your office space, the CDC provides information on keeping your environment clean. If you have concerns about cleaning your facility, contact Dartmouth Work Control at 603-646-2508.
How can I get support during this difficult time?
Speak with a professional counselor at GuidanceResources, at 844-216-8308. GuidanceResources is Dartmouth's online Employee Assistance Program (EAP) partner and offers confidential telephone counseling 24 hours a day, every day.
Faculty and staff can also contact EAP Counselor Sharon Morisi. She is available via Zoom and telephone during normal business hours and offers support to supervisors who are assisting staff. Confidential virtual counseling is also available to students, faculty, and staff with Daveen Litwin, the Tucker Center chaplain, and with the United Campus Ministry advisers of multiple faith traditions. Email Litwin for an appointment. Resources are also available at Wellness at Dartmouth.
PAY AND WORK EXPECTATIONS
Does pay continuation apply to all Dartmouth employees?
All regular non-student employees will continue to be paid their base salary or rate of pay through July 31, 2020. Temporary, seasonal, or per diem employees will be paid for hours worked.
Will grant funded employees also receive pay continuation?
There are a number of external sources that fund the work of many Dartmouth employees. Each of the external sources is providing guidance that should be reviewed. Updated guidance will be provided by the Office of Sponsored Projects.
Will I be expected to use my new banks of personal and vacation time before using Other Lost Time, once those banks are replenished for the new fiscal year?
As an employer, Dartmouth must make sound financial decisions while also supporting employees during this unprecedented situation. As good stewards of our resources, it is prudent to ask employees to use their available banks for personal and vacation time before incurring additional compensation expenses.
However, for the first pay period of the fiscal year (June 21–July 4) hourly paid employees who are not working will not be required to use their new banks of personal and vacation time, other than for scheduled vacation days, and may continue to record lost time using the "Other Lost Time" category.
Beginning July 5, all employees who are not working will be expected to use available personal or vacation time before using the "Other Lost Time" category for time away from work.
Will I be paid my regular weekly hours even if there is not enough work for me to do?
Yes, hourly paid employees will be paid their base rate of pay for their March 18 effective scheduled hours per week even if they only work a portion of those hours. For the first pay period of the fiscal year (June 21–July 4) hourly paid employees who are not working will not be required to use their new banks of personal and vacation time, other than for scheduled vacation days, and may continue to record lost time using the "Other Lost Time" category.
Beginning July 5, all employees who are not working will be expected to use their available personal and vacation time in accordance with policy when not working. If additional time is needed beyond available benefit time, Dartmouth has committed to paying employees through the end of July to support our employees through the COVID 19 public health situation. If you have no benefit time available, "Other Lost Time" should be used on your time sheet and will require your supervisor's approval. "Other Lost Time" will be paid using the base rate (without shift differential or overtime).
How should I be recording my hours?
Except as noted otherwise in this guidance with respect to the pay period June 21–July 4, when staff are remote but not working, they are expected to record vacation time and personal time. If a staff member has exhausted their personal and vacation time, they can record their time against "Other Lost Time" and continue to be paid. If they are working remotely, time should be recorded as it otherwise would.
Will I continue to receive my shift differential, overtime pay or other hourly pay premiums?
Shift differentials, overtime, or other hourly pay premiums will only be applied for time worked that meet the criteria for the premium pay rates.
What does this mean for the expectations of my work?
All employees are expected to work when work is available. Failure to do so will result in corrective action. Ask your supervisor for specifics related to the work you are expected to complete.
As a supervisor, what does this mean for what I should expect of my employees?
All employees are expected to work when work is available. Failure to do so will result in corrective action. Supervisors should clearly communicate expectations to their employees on a frequent basis and ensure that work is being performed to meet those expectations. HR consultants are available to support supervisors/managers needing assistance in communicating expectations.
What if the work I'm expected to do is on campus and not everyone is needed each day?
Supervisors and managers are establishing rotating schedules to cover the work needing to be performed on campus. Each member of the team is expected to participate in the established rotations. Failure to do so except for the reasons noted in this guidance may lead to corrective action.
What about using my vacation and personal time?
If work is not available, you are caring for others, or you are unable to perform the work due to your own illness, personal and vacation time should be depleted before using "Other Lost Time," except that for the first pay period of the fiscal year (June 21–July 4) hourly paid employees who are not working will not be required to use their new banks of personal and vacation time, other than for scheduled vacation days, and may continue to record lost time using the "Other Lost Time" category.
If you are working, whether on campus or remotely, personal and vacation time should be used for instances when you need time for appointments, to take scheduled time away from work, or other commitments. Employees are expected to discuss and coordinate the usage of paid time off (PTO) with their supervisors.
What if I am unable to report to work or complete work remotely because I am caring for children or family?
For the first pay period of the fiscal year (June 21–July 4), hourly paid employees who are not working will not be required to use their new banks of personal and vacation time, other than for scheduled vacation days, and may continue to record lost time using the "Other Lost Time" category. Beginning July 5, all employees who are not working will be expected to use available personal or vacation time before using the "Other Lost Time" category for time away from work.
All employees are expected to communicate with their supervisors regarding schedules and work expectations.
What if I am unable to report to work or complete work remotely because I have underlying health concerns?
Employees who seek a work accommodation due to an impairment, serious health condition, or other circumstance that may be covered by the Americans with Disabilities Act or the Family and Medical Leave Act should contact their health care provider about appropriate protective measures and documentation. Work with your supervisor and the Office of Institutional Diversity and Equity (IDE) on the accommodation process. Appropriate medical documentation will be required to support requests.
What if I am in an hourly paid position and have already scheduled my vacation time during for the first pay period (June 21–July 4)? Can I use "Other Lost Time" instead of my new vacation balances?
The extension of the ability to use the "Other Lost Time" category into the first pay period (June 21–July 4) is intended to provide additional relief and the preservation of some paid time off for fiscal year 21 for community members who are unable to work due to COVID-19 related circumstances, such as being unable to report to work due to a lack of available work, the need to care for children or family, or due to one's own illness. Those who are able to work and have elected to take vacation time are expected to use their new vacation time balances during this first pay period.
