Travel
Updated Travel Guidance
Travel Waivers
Athletics
Travel Advisories
Travel Registry
Please visit Travel Support and Reimbursements if you need help with your travel logistics or reimbursements.
Travel Guidance Update, June 11, 2020
Dartmouth's guidance on travel and quarantine requirements follows current guidance from the New Hampshire Department of Health and Human Services. See the latest New Hampshire guidance for employees and travel. (PDF)
According to this guidance, anyone who has traveled internationally (including to Canada), traveled on public conveyances outside of New Hampshire, Vermont, or Maine, or who has been on a cruise, should quarantine for 14 days when they return and before returning to campus. Public conveyances include, but are not limited to, airplanes, trains, subways, buses, boats, vans, ride-shares, or taxis used by the public, whether for compensation or not. Public conveyances do not include privately owned vehicles used for private purposes.
Those who can self-quarantine and work remotely may do so. If you are traveling outside of New Hampshire, Vermont, or Maine and are not using a public conveyance, no quarantine is required upon your return. If traveling, individuals should check and follow quarantine requirements in their final destination as well. We recognize that travel recommendations and quarantine requirements vary by state, including between New Hampshire and Vermont. Everyone is expected to follow their state's quarantine requirements outside of their work hours.
Dartmouth-supported international and domestic travel remains prohibited for faculty and staff at this time with an option to apply for an exemption from your dean/supervisor. Personal travel, including domestic travel outside New Hampshire and Vermont, is strongly discouraged due to possible self-quarantine requirements upon arrival at your destination, following your return home, or both.
Given the rapidly evolving nature of travel restrictions, at this time we are prohibiting all Dartmouth-sponsored international and domestic travel for staff, faculty, and students. We encourage finding alternate means of conducting business, such as teleconferencing.
Personal travel, both domestic and international, is also discouraged. Students who are departing campus to return home are exempt from this restriction. If you are traveling within the United States, please check the state and territorial health department websites for the latest information.
Questions: Students and their families should contact Student Affairs at 603-646-2980 with questions about travel. Faculty and staff should email the COVID-19 Task Force at COVID-19.task.force@dartmouth.edu.
Travel Waivers: All Dartmouth-sponsored international and domestic travel has been suspended due to the COVID-19 global pandemic. The link for Travel Waivers has been temporarily disabled.
Travel Exceptions: Faculty and staff may petition their dean or vice president for a travel exception to the travel prohibition if they feel that the proposed travel is essential for Dartmouth. The process for a travel exception petition will include the several steps outlined on Global Dartmouth.
Athletics: The Ivy League presidents announced their unanimous decision to cancel all spring athletics competitions and practices for the remainder of the academic year. In light of the pandemic, and the growing number of schools that have moved classes online for the rest of their semesters, it is no longer feasible for these competitions and practices to continue. This is a heavy blow to our student-athletes, who have sacrificed and trained so hard in their respective sports, and we regret the impact of these circumstances. Winter teams and student-athletes who have qualified for postseason play will be able to participate in league competitions.
Travel Advisories: Please visit the CDC Coronavirus Disease 2019 Information for Travel for the latest updates.
Travel Registry
All Dartmouth-sponsored international and domestic travel has been suspended due to the COVID-19 global pandemic. Personal travel, including domestic travel outside of New Hampshire and Vermont, is strongly discouraged, due to possible self-quarantine requirements. For this reason, we are temporarily discontinuing the travel registry. Faculty and staff who wish to request a travel exemption should refer to Global Dartmouth Travel Exceptions.
