Travel Support and Reimbursements
The following are travel support resources for the Dartmouth community members who may need assistance with travel back to their home.
Existing Tickets
Airfare
Lodging
Conference Fees
Dartmouth Coach Bus Tickets
Rented Bus/Coach Bus
Visitors/Speakers
Grant-Funded Travel
Travel Insurance
Prepayments for Students for Travel
Cash Advances
Visa Fees
Immunizations
Personal Expenses
Posting of COVID-19-Related Expenses
Existing Tickets
If an individual booked directly with an airline, they should try to work with that airline to change their flight. Dartmouth may be able to assist by covering change fees. Please consult with the Dartmouth unit sponsoring your travel.
In instances where it is not possible to change an existing ticket for a timely return flight please contact:
Travel Leaders
Travelers who booked directly through Travel Leaders should contact them for assistance if they need to change their ticket. Travel Leaders can assist with the purchase of new tickets in instances where it is not possible to change an existing ticket for a timely return flight. If pursuing this option, please consult with the Dartmouth unit sponsoring your travel. Telephone: 603-646-3900 or 800-284-1647
college.travel.office@dartmouth.edu
Travelers who booked directly through Travel Leaders should contact them for assistance if they need to change their ticket. Travel Leaders can assist with the purchase of new tickets in instances where it is not possible to change an existing ticket for a timely return flight. If pursuing this option, please consult with the Dartmouth unit sponsoring your travel. Cruise & Travel Experts
Contact Cruise & Travel experts when it is not possible to change an existing ticket for a timely return flight. If pursuing this option, please consult with the Dartmouth unit sponsoring your travel. The College has a corporate card on file with Cruise & Travel Experts. Travelers can also use their corporate or other credit card to make purchases. Cruise & Travel Experts will need the person's full name as it appears in their passport and their date of birth. A cell phone number or email is helpful, too. Monday–Friday only, 8:30 am to 5:30 pm EDT;
After 5 pm, email Paula Scholten
Telephone: 800-721-8985 Vickie Coston
(Vickie is a former Travel Leaders employee and continues to provide excellent customer service support to our campus. She is not available on Mondays.)
vcoston@cruiseandtravelexperts.com Paula Scholten
pscholten@cruiseandtravelexperts.com
Cancellations and Reimbursements
If travel plans have changed, individuals should reach out to the relevant travel vendors to cancel the airline tickets, hotel reservations, etc. as soon as possible. Individuals who have booked travel using a Dartmouth College corporate card, procurement card, or Dartmouth College check should note that the guidance may be different than for travelers who booked utilizing their personal credit cards/funds.
Please note that, per the Dartmouth Business Expense Policy, individuals are required to submit documentation of payment of business expenses. If any single business or travel expense is less than $75, documentation is not required, with exceptions related to business entertainment, gifts, lodging, relocation expenses, and NCAA-related expenses.
Airfare
Individuals should make every effort to cancel their flight(s) before the scheduled departure time or the ticket will have no redeemable value.
Many airlines are waiving change penalties through April 2020 and several are allowing cancellations. Each airline has different cancellation policies and penalties so individuals should contact their original booking channel to confirm if the airline has a waiver in place for their destination.
If travel was booked through Travel Leaders and the trip has been canceled, the changes can be made on the Travel Leaders booking site before the scheduled departure date. If an agent's assistance is required, please call during daytime hours, when the agent staffing levels are at the highest, to avoid the longer hold times that may be experienced with the after-hours service. The phone number for Travel Leaders is 603-646-3900.
Many airline tickets, including non-refundable tickets, maintain their value for one year after the date of issue, after the cost of a change fee. The value can be applied to future travel for the same traveler on the same airline. Individuals should make every effort to use ticket credits for Dartmouth-related travel before purchasing new airline tickets.
Change fees are typically deducted from the ticket value. If a change fee is charged as a separate fee, it will be paid by the College. Documentation will be required for payment of the change fee if the cost is greater than $75.
The cost of a canceled airline ticket will be paid by the College from the funding source the travel was to be funded from unless there are specific restrictions (see below).
Some individuals utilize their personal credit cards for travel expenses. For airline tickets purchased on a personal credit card and canceled, the College will reimburse for any cancellation fees. If the College had already reimbursed the individual for the airline ticket costs and the trip was canceled, the individual is expected to pay back the reimbursed amount net of any cancellation charges or fees.
Lodging
Lodging vendors, including Airbnb hosts, strictly enforce cancellation penalties. Individuals should make every effort to cancel hotel reservations prior to the cancellation period defined in the hotel confirmation. Lodging cancellation fees are allowable expenses.
Conference Fees
Cancellations by conference attendee: If an individual cancels their conference attendance due to the current travel restrictions, conference registration fees or cancellation fees may be paid by Dartmouth at the department's discretion.
If an individual cancels their conference attendance due to the current travel restrictions, conference registration fees or cancellation fees may be paid by Dartmouth at the department's discretion. Cancellations by conference host: If a conference is canceled by the host, the conference attendees should seek reimbursement from the conference host. In the rare situation where the host will not reimburse, attendees should seek approval from the department for payment. Attendees should submit back-up documentation with the expense request for payment/reimbursement.
Dartmouth Coach Bus Tickets
Bus tickets booked through Dartmouth Coach may be used for services that operate in and out of Boston on any trip, in either direction, for up to one year from the date they were purchased. Rebooking tickets on the Boston services is unnecessary. Dartmouth Coach also offers free refunds (before expiration) if customers don't anticipate using a ticket.
On the reservation-based New York City services, Dartmouth Coach will waive all change fees and process refunds for any passenger who booked travel before May 1, 2020.
Visit the Dartmouth Coach website for more information.
Rented Bus/Coach Bus
Travel booked using a coach bus that needs to be canceled should be canceled as soon as possible.
Visitors/Speakers
Individuals should refer to current campus event guidelines for specific information regarding dates/group size when determining whether to cancel Dartmouth-hosted events or conferences. This guidance is changing frequently and Dartmouth event organizers should use their judgment to determine whether to cancel future events.
Visitors who were paid in advance for travel expenses are expected to reimburse Dartmouth for any refunds received if the travel is canceled. If the visitor is anticipating future Dartmouth-sponsored travel, the visitor can retain the airline credit in their name and use it for the future Dartmouth travel.
Payment for services to performers/speakers is generally not payable if the activity is canceled. However, there may be a contract in place for these activities. Dartmouth sponsors should review the terms and conditions of these contracts to determine if payments are legally required when activity is canceled. If assistance is needed in reviewing contracts, please contact Dartmouth Procurement Services.
Grant-Funded Travel
Please refer to the Dartmouth Office of Sponsored Projects website for guidance on canceled trips that were expected to be funded by grants.
Travel Insurance
Domestic travel insurance is not an allowable expense per the Dartmouth Business Expense policy.
International travel insurance is an allowable expense under the Dartmouth Business Expense Policy; however, this insurance may not cover COVID-19-related claims.
Prepayments for Students for Travel
Students who were paid in advance for travel expenses are expected to reimburse Dartmouth any refunds received if the travel is canceled. If the student is anticipating future Dartmouth-sponsored travel, the student can retain the airline credit in their name and use it for the future Dartmouth travel.
Cash Advances
Individuals who received cash advances prior to travel should return the cash advance if the travel is canceled. If there are extenuating circumstances with returning the cash advance, please contact the department sponsor.
Visa Fees
Visa fees related to costs will be covered by Dartmouth College if the travel was canceled.
Immunizations
Immunization costs will be covered by Dartmouth College if the travel was canceled.
Personal Expenses
Personal expenses related to canceled travel are not allowable Dartmouth business expenses.
Posting of COVID-19-Related Expenses
Activity/Subactivity Combinations for Transactions Related to COVID-19:
766007-Extraordinary Circumstances, 1004-Coronavirus; to be used for student-related expenses
346202-Emergency Operations, 1004-Coronavirus; to be used for all other expenses
These values should only be used for incremental costs or refunds of revenue that are unique to coronavirus preparation, mitigation or other activities or actions that have been approved by the Dartmouth COVID-19 Task Force or one of the related working groups. Examples include costs related to quarantine that would not otherwise have been incurred, extraordinary costs related to student travel, and refunds in revenues including tuition, and room and board (including any related reduction of scholarship). These activity/subactivity values should be used with the relevant department's org value and funding value.
These values should not be used for expenses such as travel that has been canceled or expenses related to on-campus activities that have been canceled or postponed (which may or may not have lost revenue associated with them). These are costs that are incurred in the normal course of a department's operations and should be charged to the chart string that those costs would normally be charged to. For these types of expenses, departments and divisions should use best efforts to identify the expenses or lost revenues attributable to COVID-19 during their Q3 projections. Examples of things that should not be charged to the above activities/subactivities include:
Overtime costs for employees required because other team members are sick
Supplies such as hand sanitizers that a department decides to purchase
Items needed for operation of business continuity plans (laptops, etc.)
If you have questions about whether it is appropriate to use the established COVID-19 activity/subactivity values, please contact Dianne Ingalls.
